---
layout: default
title: Unpacking patriarchy and the rise of feminine agency
excerpt: An academic exploration from my sophomore year philosophy class, this piece delves into the concepts of patriarchy and the rise of feminine agency. Reflecting on my extensive writings on gender and feminism, this article stands out as a personal favorite, offering insightful perspectives on gender dynamics.
reading_time: 10 minute read
published: true
date: 2019-12-14
---

## I

For a significant part of human history, the patriarchy lingered throughout time and space. The patriarchy is present in multiple cultures. In these societies, the power imbalance between men and women are highly evident, seeing that [men are usually honored higher positions of power in distinct aspects of society](https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/jun/22/the-age-of-patriarchy-how-an-unfashionable-idea-became-a-rallying-cry-for-feminism-today).

Unlike other social concepts that are present within the structure of society, [patriarchy seems to be “natural.”](https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23831740-400-the-origins-of-sexism-how-men-came-to-rule-12000-years-ago/) Social constructs such as religious beliefs or political views are usually given the benefit of the doubt and debated upon by the people who are part of the communities affected by said constructs. On the other hand, discussions regarding patriarchy has just recently started to bloom over the past few decades.

The origin of the patriarchy—the seemingly boundless reign and domination of the macho-fascist male—appears to have sprung from what is called a patrilocal residence. This means when a man and woman is married, they choose to live with the family of the man while the woman leaves her own family. [Under his own home, the man has greater power over his wife.]([https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674038875-002](https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674038875-002)) When people began settling down due to the discovery of agriculture, the population veered towards patrilocal tendencies in their communities. This tradition and the conventions that came along with it were passed down from generation to generation up to where we are now in time. Although we could say that patrilocal residencies are not as popular anymore, the values that were instilled throughout our history were deeply embedded into our behavior and into our collective culture. Hence, we now possess a difficulty in dealing with the repercussions brought by the patriarchal ideologies which now exists naturally in our society.

In this struggle, we find that [humanity is male](https://newuniversityinexileconsortium.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/Simone-de-Beauvoir-The-Second-Sex-Jonathan-Cape-1956.pdf). That is, the man is the default. By second grade, my English teacher had taught me this and normalized patriarchy in my young mind, probably without even realizing it. She was teaching us English pronouns and told us that if we were referring to a neutral figure, someone whose pronouns we have no knowledge of, then we should refer to them as “he.” Religion taught that too. God has always been a “He.” It has only been recently when I started hearing phrases such as “God is a woman” or people referring to God as “She.” Here, we find the man as the subject, and the woman remains as the Other.

## II

Otherness is a result of being different within the group of a dominant class. In this case, the dominant class is male due to patriarchy. They are entitled to more privileges and power. This dominance is exercised even by just the mere existence of this dominance. In a world with two biological sexes separated by social roles and constructs, if one is more powerful than the other, then this power is certainly self-proclaimed, along with the otherness of the other. That is, the man defines himself as the subject and classifies the woman as the Other. [He defines her, not as he knows her, but in relation to himself.](https://newuniversityinexileconsortium.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/Simone-de-Beauvoir-The-Second-Sex-Jonathan-Cape-1956.pdf) In return, the woman’s identity is charred and is lost within the man’s definition of what a woman is and what she should be. Unfortunately, it is not similar the other way around. In a patriarchal society, the women are always the Other. Frankly, it is deeply incongruous that she is part of a couple together with the man, yet she is the Other even though both components of the couple is necessary to in the composition and dynamics of the couple.

Ironically, the only way that patriarchy could have persisted throughout human history is if the woman submitted to the power of the macho-fascist male. Sadly, it does not matter if the woman ever consented to this treatment or if she was made to consent due to social conventions that were present in her time. However, even though we could say that with today’s feminist movement, women are now allowed to say no to men, it is interesting to point out, like what De Beauvoir said, that [women only have what men wants to give](https://newuniversityinexileconsortium.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/Simone-de-Beauvoir-The-Second-Sex-Jonathan-Cape-1956.pdf). In retrospect, men gave women the right to vote, the right to form movements and the space to continue such movements. When women fight for their right to equity, men still get to decide whether they should give women what women want. In deciding, men evaluate what they, as men, want.

## III

Lately, the feminist movement has been growing to be more independent from male power. In coming together to fight for feminism, women can talk about their experiences and shared beliefs. Unlike our predecessors, women today have more privileges due to the mass movement that they have created. In this society, a woman can now choose to define herself as she is or as she wants to. She is no longer just a wife, or a daughter, or a mother; she can also be a leader, or an engineer. Even though patriarchal ideologies are still present in the society today, and even though women are still seen as weak compared to men in almost every aspect, the moments in which women are finally recognized based on their own merits are multiplying. Hence, we know that there is some sort of development happening. Women are restructuring society into a better one. Most importantly, this revamping of society was initiated by a response to a collective struggle which continuously oppressed women for thousands of years. Now, the woman is slowly rising to become a subject, a default of humanity. She is successful in trying to escape the box in which she was caged by the limitations set by social conventions that stem from patriarchal ideas.